# Practice: Opening to freedom and strength through reflection

Take a little time to settle in meditation. Then see if it is possible to allow, and to tune into, a sense of energetic alignment along the central axis of the body. Feel the strength that comes from this alignment of energy, including the body as a whole in your awareness. (Alternatively, you could think of something which stimulates a sense of strength in you, then tune into the feeling of energy in the body that is present, and allow that to align the body sense.) Let yourself enjoy it for some time if you like.

Trying to stay connected to, and supported by, this sense of strength and alignment in the body as much as you are able, begin to reflect on your life and your social environment, asking yourself if there are any values or beliefs that you have absorbed from the culture and from your social environment that are contributing to suffering of some sort that might be questionable.

Notice, allow, and feel as fully as you can any emotional and energetic responses to what you see, and notice also the mental responses. If it seems that something arises emotionally that needs holding and attention before continuing, take time to do that now.

When you feel ready, see if it is possible to reflect in a way that challenges this belief, or that recognizes it is not inherently true. Perhaps you can uncover the assumptions it rests on, or expose it as merely an agreed-upon conventionality.

Again, as you do this, notice, allow, and feel as fully as you can any emotional, energetic and mental responses.

Especially with regard to any sense of strength that may surface, it might be important to try to let go of any preconceptions about what it should feel like. Strength can have softness and pliancy to it; it need not feel brittle at all.

Then if any feeling of strength and/or freedom arises, see if you can allow that to fill out in your body, and enjoy it. (It can be particularly helpful to feel the quality of strength filling the lower belly and the legs.) Let yourself linger in any feelings of strength or freedom that emerge.

If strong anger arises, is it possible to find the quality of strength within the anger, and to tune into that, thus helping it to become a more wholesome emotion?

If grief or sadness arise, what does it feel like they need right now? Sometimes in developing experience working with difficult emotions, we may have developed at the same time a habit to incline towards what is emotionally difficult at the expense of noticing and opening to the lovely . If it seems that emotions such as grief or sadness need more attention and care in the present, is it possible to do that without neglecting the sense of freedom and strength?

It is probably helpful to end the session with an awareness that this process of questioning values and beliefs is a journey. However you are feeling right now is part of that journey to a certain freedom.